From Hanselman it's dot com.
It's Hanselman. It's a weekly
discussion with web developer and
technologists. Scott Hanselman hosted by
Carl Franklin. This is Jeff Macio
Lake announcing show number 32
recorded Sunday, September 10th, 2006. Support for
Hansel minutes is provided by
COVID Smith tools, makers of
code Smith, an extensible template
based code generator for dotnet
Hansel and its listeners. Get
$100 off code Smith professional
with coupon code H M
100. online@covidsmithtools.com. Support is also
provided by as PPOs the.net
and Java component publisher Hanselman
its listeners. Get 20% off
the price of any purchase
product or suite with coupon
code H M one two
three four five six seven
eight. online@wwwdotaspose.com. Support is also
provided by.net developers journal the
world's leading.net developer magazine online
at www dot  dot
com. In this episode, Scott
talks with Carl about MOC
objects. Hi, this is Carl Franklin
and you're listening to Hanselman
it's. I'm here with Scott
Hanselman as I am every
week. Hi Scott, how are
you sir? Doing fine. I
really enjoyed your DNR TV
last week. That was great.
Well, this week actually. Yeah,
that was pretty cool. Yeah.
And today we're talking about
mock objects. Yeah. You know,
we talked about test driven
development recently and had some
suggestions from a number of
people, including Phil hack, who
I respect very much who
said, well, you've got to
do one on mocks. And
I think that more and
more people are doing test
driven development, or they are
at least doing lots of
tests as we learned last
week, right? Test driven development
and writing lots of tests
or different things, two different
things. Right? One of the
things that I find very
frustrating is trying to test
something when there's a whole
stack of stuff underneath, that
has to be just so
the database set up, or
maybe you need data, you
need web services, connectivity, and
then you end up often
just saying, I won't bother
testing that it's too much
of a hassle. And that's
where mock objects come in.
Mock objects are objects that
have the same interface as
your real objects, but obviously
don't do anything. Right. Right.
That's a good way to
put it. So you could,
of course, just if you
had interfaces for all the
things you wanted to test,
you could just provide an
object that implements that interface.
So you don't need a
mock object framework to do
that, but it takes a
little bit more work on
your effort. Like for, for
my purposes, let's use the
example of DAS blog. So
DAS blog has this very
complicated, very icky interface called
I blog data service. And
right now there's only one
implementation of I blog data
service. This is the thing
for stuff like get entry
and get comments and things
like that. And we've always
said that one day we
would hook it up to
a database. Even though right
now it's talking to XML,
but we do some unit
testing and DAS blog, but
we usually have to have
a folder full of basically
fake blog posts to do
even the most basic testing.
Right. So we could, of
course just write an object
of our own then implements
I've logged data service, and
does basically fakes out the
tests that breaks down when
you start getting into the
object, changing its behavior. So
you call it once it
does this. And then the
second time you call the
same method, it does another
thing. Okay. So the object
has internal state. So then
you end up writing a
lot of code of your
own in this fake object
that implements that interface you
want to test, and that
doesn't necessarily move the ball
forward. I was going to
say, I mean, I mean
this, this whole thing, lock
object thing can only work
if it's easy to implement,
because if you spend more
time writing mock objects than
you, real objects you face,
you're basically wasting time. Right?
Exactly. Now the definition you
said was an object that
implements the same interface as
the one you want to
test. That's a good way
to put it, but a
lot of the newer mock
objects technologies within.net support mocking,
not just interfaces, they actually
mock concrete types. So you
can actually simulate the behavior
of an actual object, you
know, in a test environment,
even if you don't have
an interface. So for example,
maybe you can just Mark
a few methods virtual, and
then you can mock that
object. Or if you use
one of the more advanced
ones, they'll use interception technologies
that will allow you to
mock really anything at all.
And this is really useful
when the thing that you're
trying to test, you know,
has some results that change
a lot, something that's kind
of non-deterministic. So we're talking
about a, what if the
time changes or you're doing
wind speed? You know, just
something that is environmental, even
if you do, you know,
if you do the testing
such that you have to
hook up to a real
device, can you fake that
device? Can you fake that
interface? Sometimes if it's network
connectivity or if you haven't
talked to a, something that's
slow, do a database call
or talk to a web
service. And also sometimes when
you are testing objects, you
have to include information that
you really don't want to
be in the tests, like
a database connection strings that
you'd rather not do. And
you're really not trying to
test the underlying system. You're
trying to test the code
that interacts with that system,
right? So there's a lot
of different frameworks out there.
The ones that everyone keeps
talking about, if you look
around and ask around are
rhino mocks, easy mock, which
is a little older and
a port of a Java
tool, isn't it true that
like every.net tool that's awesome.
As a port, a Java
tool. Yeah. Funny how that
works and mock to type
mock, which is interesting. Cause
there are a lot like
test-driven dot net, they've got
a community version of personal
version and a professional version.
And then there's some other
tools like J flowers, doubler
that we can talk about
it. But, But now the
last time I talked about
mock objects and mock was
really the only game in
town. It's been a while.
A lot of new stuff
has come up there's Yeah.
And then there's end mock
two, which I guess is
now the recommended version. If
you visit the old end
mock site, Let's just talk
about what the goal of
these things is first. You
know, what's the goal of,
of a mock object framework,
I guess it's to take
the grunt work out of
managing mock objects. Right? Well,
yeah. So that's a good
point. So you, if you
run a test, you know,
you go public void test
and you put your test
attribute on the top and
then you right. Click and
you say run test and
you have a bunch of
assertions, right? So you assert
that this will be equal
to that. Or you assert
that whatever's returned from this
function is equal to something,
right? Yeah. But with a
mock you want to not
just have assertions, you have
actually expectations. So you might
have an object called person
and you might expect that
get first name is going
to return Scott, for whatever
reason, maybe it was populated
from the database or whatever,
but you need to know
that that's your expectation. So
you could do what we
did before. We talked about
making something that implements I
person, you have to create
an interface  or with
a mock a framework you
could say in your test,
I expect the call to
person dot, get, you know,
get first name to return
Scott. And I expect that
and I'm going to warn
you mr. Test mock object
thing ahead of time. So
then when I turn you
on and actually do the
work, you're going to do
the right faking that's Appropriate.
So it basically is going
to just go ahead and
build an object. That's going
to provide the behavior that
the test expects. And then
once you have that framework,
then you can go in
and change the mock stuff
to real code. Is that
right? Is this like a
prototype? No. So what you're
trying to do is like,
let's say that you've got
some analysis tool that, that
makes a bunch of calls
to an underlying object system
and then perform some analysis.
You're not testing the underlying
system, you're testing the analysis,
right? So you could spend
a whole bunch of time
getting that underlying interface set
up, or you could really
just focus on the results.
I see, you know, that
assuming that my expectations are
correct, but assuming that person
dot first name does in
fact return Scott, which isn't
the point of the test,
it's the point of the
thing that consumes them Value.
I see. So the purpose
is to get tests up
and running quickly, not to
prototype the underlying code. Right?
Right. Now you could, you
could use it that way.
I mean, you could go
and say, I'm not quite
sure how it's going to
get that value. So you
could use mock objects within
the context of test driven
development. So you brought up
an interesting point, which is
a little orthogonal, the way,
the direction that we were
going. But you could say,
I'm going to write my
test as like a specification.
I expect it to work
like this. So you can
basically mock out most of
your system and there's nothing
wrong with that. That's a
really good way to do
it. You could say this
thing, I want to write,
it's going to be really
complicated, but I know when
it comes out, it's going
to say Scott, right? Yeah.
You know, and that's a
really great way to design
a framework, right? If you
don't know how your data
access layer should behave, you
can basically mock up the
whole thing and then fill
in the blanks later. Right.
So that's a great way
to use mocking within the
context of having the test
drive your development. So you've
brought up a really great
point. So let's talk about
like some of the examples,
like for example, and mock
the, the protocol is basically
you make a new mockery,
which is kind of cooling
off what they call. Yeah.
Mockery am equals new mockery.
Okay. And let's say that
you want to mock a,
a person. So you'd go
and say mock.new mock. And
you say type of person,
you say, I want to
mock a person. And then
what's cool is you actually
just say, you know, person
P equals mock.new mock and
you get a person out
of it. And then you
cast because the mock.new mock
returns an object, you have
to cast it to the
object that you're expecting. Okay.
So then you have, you
have a person now, this
is where the syntax gets
really cool. I think so
within mock two, you go
and you say something like
expect dot once on person
dot get property, quote, first
name dot will return a
value of Scott. So it's
really a big, long dot
syntax, but it reads like
English expect once on person
get property, first name will
return Scott. Okay. And it
ends up being a lot
of dots and parentheses. So
you basically prepare your expectations.
So here's a good example.
I'll just use one from
a, a, a blog post
that I read about, about
an MOC at shrink stir
slash . And in this
example, they had items that
are going in a shopping
cart. It's not the items
we're trying to test. It's
the shopping cart. Okay. So
the shopping cart is going
to compute the total of
the items. So we'll mock
two items. We'll fake out
two items. Okay. And we'll
add them to the shopping
cart, the items aren't real,
but the shopping cart doesn't
care. Then we call shopping
cart, compute total. We've told
the items ahead of time.
If anyone calls price on
you, here are the values
we, you should return those
values. Those lies that we've
set up. Those expectations. We've
set up, have been set
up in the test. We
didn't have to create any
phony objects to do it.
We test the shopping cart.
We say compute total. And
then the assertion that the
total equals a certain amount
lives in the same function
that the expectations lived. So
the test data and the
assertion live in the same
place, which makes the management
of your tests a lot
easier. Yeah. So in here
we are testing a shopping
cart, passing it, real items
that aren't implementing an interface
that it understands. Now, one
of the interesting things about
N mock and most of
the mock things that I've
seen are that a lot
of them use strings and
kind of reflection type stuff.
So in this example, you
would say, you know, expect
on item dot, get property.
And then you put in
quotes the name of the
property that you're going to
be calling. Okay. So in
this case, I might say
item, I put, put in
quotes price, we don't get
compiler support there. We don't
know that price is really
an on the item. If
we misspell it, because we've
put the name of the
property and quotes, it's a
string it's being tunneled. We
don't have that kind of
IntelliSense support for this fake
object. Now I ND Raheen
AKA or an any rights
rhino mocks. And what he's
done is he said, you
know, I really didn't like
that. I have to pass
in these quotes. I want
the pro the, I want
the syntax to be cleaner.
I want IntelliSense for my
mock objects. So his syntax
is you make a mock
repository and you say repository,
create mock type of person.
You do same kind of
thing. And then in your
expectations, you would actually say,
expect.call. And then you put
in princesses and then you
actually call the fake function.
Okay. So you'd say, expect.call
parentheses. And then you'd say,
you know, person dot, whatever,
put that in parentheses and
say dot return. So in
that case, you're getting IntelliSense
because you're actually passing in
a fake call and he's
intercepting that call. That's interesting.
When you're done setting up
your expectations, you say, okay,
repository replay, and then you
do your tests. That's an
interesting Way to do it.
I would, I would, I
would die without, until, since.
So that's, that's a great
way to do it. Rhino
mocks has some limitations in
that. The things that you
want to mock have to
be marked virtual. Cause what
he's doing internally is he's
basically making a derived class
of the thing that you
want to mock returning you
like. So if sample, I'm
saying mock, a person he's
going to make secret internal
derived person and then pass
it back and you'll cast
it to a person and
you don't care. And then
when you make the call
because you marked it virtual
indicating you want to change
it, that lets him basically
get in. Isn't that a
little dangerous though? I mean,
what if your app is
doing a lot of casting
and, and, and, you know,
dealing with times a big,
You have a big object
hierarchy and, and marking something
virtual. Isn't what you want
to do. Because basically when
you Mark virtual, you're saying,
I intend someone to extend
this in the future. And
if you're trying to use
a tool like rhino mocks
on a series of objects
that have not been marked
virtual, you can't do it.
Then you got to get
into some of the more
advanced mocking technologies, like Type
mock. So how does that,
how does the word virtual
translate to VB programmers? Just
curiously. I think it's over
rideable in VB. Okay. So,
And C-sharp is, must inherit
in VB and virtual is
over rideable. Okay. Not must
override, but over rideable. Right?
Got it. So you're basically,
you're saying I will in
the future extend this object
and I want to open
it up for that. So
then people talk about virtual
calls being slower, because if
I hand you a person
object, you don't know if
it's really a person object
or if it's actually a
really tall person object that
derives from person. Yeah. Cause
when you go on call
person dot height, you're really
calling the derived class, override
overwritten, rather implementation of height.
So what, what I ND
is doing, that's very clever
is using that virtual ness
as an opportunity to, to
build up his, his fake
versions of the same objects,
which is pretty cool. Yeah.
That's cool. So other than
rhino mocks, what are some
of the other things Tools
out there? So From what
I'm seeing, I have not
personally used type mock, but
I'm understanding and reading their
documentation, which is very good
documentation. I've been impressed reading
their documentation type market shrinks
to S slash . This
seems to be the, the
big stuff. This is the
heavy guns. I was reading
an article by Roy .
I think it was at
shrink stir slash . And
he was saying that, you
know, when you can't get
your mocking done with one
thing, you bring in the
big guns and it's it's
type mock type mock has
got this thing called natural
type mocks, which basically you
set up a scope, you
say using, and you have
a using block and you
say, record expectations, start recording.
And then everything in the
block is being mocked TiVo
for your mock objects. Okay.
Everything's being mocked. So you
basically mock it and you
just call the methods and
then it just fakes it
all and intercepts it. Wow.
Then you do your assertions.
And then at the very
end, you say, okay, well
now verify mock manager verify
that all of our expectations
were met. So it's, it's
a very powerful, very natural
way to do things. Now,
those guys have got a
community version and they've got
a, a professional and enterprise
additions. I'm looking online here
with the prices are, looks
like, Oh, and you get
test-driven dot net. So it's
like, it's 300 bucks enterprise
personal and, and they've got
their community edition and they've
got a series of what
features are available in what
and what versions, all of
their stuff is very kind
of intercepted everything's on the
fly. Right? They'll let you
do a lot more advanced
type stuff from, from reading
their documentation. They've got ms.
Build tasks for mocking Nat
tasks. I mean, this is
a complete mock they're serious
about it. Yeah. Now, one
of the things that I
like about rhino mocks, not
to come back to the
free product, but why Namoks
has a dotnet one, one
version. And I always like
it when people have both.
And I think it's great
that, that he respects one,
one, and realizes that useful
work is happening on, on
one shore and especially the
version of tools that, that
are going to be used
by people on one, one,
two Oh and whatever else.
Yeah, totally. I'm using his,
a vinyl max, 2.9 to
do some, some one, one
mocking his stuff is pretty
cool. The only limitation of
course, is that virtual thing.
That is a little, a
little frustrating, but you know,
you can, you can work,
work your way around and
things like that. I know
that Phil hack uses that.
I think in subtext for
a lot of his marketing
now there's also like a,
an end unit itself has
some, has some mock technology
built into it with end
unit to there's a discussion
of that at a shrink
stir slash  E. And
it seems to be kind
of interface based. It's kind
of the, the standard mock
object stuff is I want
to mock something that implements
a certain interface, and that
makes things really easy because
the interface is just a
contract. So then you can
just say, well, go ahead
and fake this out for
me, say new dynamic mock,
and then mock this interface.
And then go ahead and
give me a fake instance.
And then you use kind
of reflection, style string stuff
to say, well, I expect
this to happen when you
call this. So just to
make sure that we're clear,
because this is a little
confusing because everything starts with
an right. So this is
actually mock objects within an
unit. So there's an MOC,
which is a little older,
and that has been subsumed
by end MOC two. Okay.
So an mock two is
the one we were talking
about before then there's rhino
mock there's type mock, which
is the big, expensive, most
powerful one. And then there's
some lightweight kind of mock
object stuff in end unit
two that lets you mock
interfaces, very cleanly. And it's
already built into the end
unit that you're already using.
So you already go and
say using end unit dot
framework here, you just go
and say, using any unit
dot marks, you can go
and say, I expect exceptions.
So you can say, when
this MOC gets called on
this function, throw a new
exception that ties in nicely
with the expected exception attributes
that are built into a
10 unit. So you don't
have to pick one and
just go with that. You
can pick the one that
feels the most natural. Sometimes
you'll use rhino mock for
your, for most of your
mocking. And then you'll pull
out a type mock for,
you know, for the, for
the big guns for doing
the really complicated stuff. Scott,
what about Microsoft visual studio
team system? Is there anything
in team system for doing
mock objects? Well, there's a
lot, It's a unit testing,
you know, in team system,
but there doesn't appear to
be anything that explicitly calls
out mock objects. Okay. So
they're not going to do
it for you and you
can certainly use mocks within
team system. Sure. One of
the courses you can use
any of these tools because
it's visual studio, Right. But
team's system doesn't include a,
their own view of mock
objects. Okay. Probably a good
thing. Cause there's a lot
of people who've already put
thought into that and I
don't think we need another
thing invented. I meant it
over again. All right, Scott,
you were telling me about
an article you read from
IBM about, about MOC objects,
A little bit of an
older article, but I thought
it was useful. It was,
it shrinks or slash
talks about, you know, just
kind of the concepts behind
mock objects. It speaks a
little bit of a Java
speak, but it explains the
idea of, you know, the
mock object being that, that,
that middleman, that opportunity to
do the interception and, and
some of the, the theory
behind that when you would
make the decisions to mock
something and when you wouldn't.
Okay. That's a good question.
When would you, I mean,
you know, we've given a
lot of information about MOC
objects and about tools, but
when do you need mock
objects? What are the, what
are your criteria for saying,
you know, this would be
markable. So That's a very,
it's a very, very good
question. So I'll give you
a couple of concrete, examples
of times when I've, you
know, I've needed to use
it. Like recently I was
working on a, an article
for coding for fun, and
I was using a barcode
scanner and, you know, I
had these unit tests that
needed that raw data. And
I had an eye bar
code scanner interface, and I
was going back and forth
and I kept having to
pause things and then do
manual scanning. So here was
an example of some external
thing in this case, a
barcode and I really needed
to, to capture its data.
Now I could have just,
you know, captured its data
and pasted it directly into
the test and bypass the
exercising of its of its
interface. But because I'd gone
to the effort to abstract
the way that, that bit
of hardware, it was useful
to go and make a
mock barcode scanner that would
return kind of, you know,
TiVo data. So Something that
has that returns non-deterministic results,
maybe it would be great.
I kept, I kept scanning
this over and over again,
but it was, it was
a, in this case I
kept scanning the same three
books. And I wanted to
take a look at not
just the, the interaction between
my test and the barcode
scanner, but to make sure
that I wasn't corrupting some
internal data structures as I
went and scan those books.
So I kept scanning these
books manually and I was
like, Oh, this is ridiculous.
I'll just go and use
an ordered rhino mock and
say that this is what
I'm expecting to get back
the next three times that
I do the scanning. You
know, that was an example
where I really should've thought
about mock right off the
bat, because like you had
mentioned the very, the very
beginning of us talking, knowing
about mock objects ahead of
time can allow you to
actually design with mocks in
mind. Right. And make the
interface that you're gonna end
up using a lot cleaner.
Yeah. I think also another
good example would be to
anytime you've got a, a
web service that provides data
or any kind of data
service or data access layer
that being able to do
mocking when, when, when the,
the testing of the data
access layer, isn't the point,
but it's those things that
consume it, do analysis on
it, that you're gonna be
doing the testing on the
Scott. One other thing you
said, if you want to
start get started with mock
objects, you know, probably download
and mock two and download
a easy mock or rhino
mocks. Why not, if you're
serious about this and you've
got the money just go
right to something like type
mock and use that all
the time. Well, you know,
if I were a guy
working by myself, if I
were a one man shop,
I would probably eventually end
up buying type mock.net. You
know what I mean? It
is the most advanced that
I've seen. It has a
very, very nice syntax. It's
got, you know, all sorts
of support for little bits
of fluff that only a
Polish application has like automatic
updating and 64 bits, you
know, and static instructors and
stuff. But, you know, for
the most part, you're going
to get what you need
out of an mock two
and or rhino mock. Okay.
For some of the basic
stuff you're doing. So, you
know, I don't know. I
don't think that I would
standardize on an entire enterprise
when there's such a great
open source story out there.
I see, you know, I
mean, I, again, I don't
know the guys at type
mocks, but I was able
to go in and start
mocking my stuff with rhino
mocks very quickly. I mean,
it was so obvious. And
then within an MOC, the,
the syntax is so intuitive.
These basically you're building up
these sentences to say, I
expect all this to go
down the way it goes
down, you know, it's so
it's, so it's so intuitive.
Like in the context of
I'm doing banking, right? We
do a lot of online
banking at my company being
able to go and say,
I expect this value of
this, you know, this account
to have this much money
in this account to have
that much, I'm going to
transfer some money. And then
now I expect these values
to be this way, and
then to have a mocked
out the entire backend for
our banking system to be
so easy in, in, in
Denmark. So between mock and
rhino mock, it covers the
80, 90% case, but it's
good to know the tight
box out there to, to
test existing systems. Right? Sometimes
you might have a test
that system that you can't
design, you can't Mark this
virtual, or you can't redesign
that. That's when you bring
in the, the intercepting stuff,
like type model. All right.
Great. Well, that's the show,
Scott. Thanks very much. And
I'm sure that the listeners
appreciate your analysis of mock
objects. Thanks. And we'll talk
to you next week on
handsome.